- Big Data: 
  - large volume of structured and unstructured data 
  - generated by organizations and individuals on a daily basis. 
  - Characterized by the 3Vs:
    - Volume, 
    - Velocity, and 
    - Variety. 
  - analyzed for insights
  - lead to better decisions and 
  - strategic business moves.
  - Big Data
    - Hadoop
      - Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS)
        - distributed file system
        - allows for the storage of large data sets across multiple machines. 
        - provides high throughput access to data and 
        - is designed to be fault-tolerant.
      - MapReduce algorithm
        - programming model and an associated implementation for processing and generating large data sets
        - with a parallel, distributed algorithm on a cluster.
    - Spark
    - Hive
    - Pig
    - HBase
    - Flume
    - Sqoop
    - Kafka
    - Zookeeper
    - Oozie
    - Mahout
    - Cassandra
    - MongoDB
    - Redis
    - Neo4j
    - GraphX
    - Presto
    - Impala
    - Drill
    - Airflow
  - Data Lakes
  - Data Warehouses
    - e.g. 
      - Hadoop Datalake on parquet files in AWS environment
      - Amazon Redshift, 
      - Google BigQuery, 
      - Snowflake, 
      - Microsoft Azure Synapse Analytics, 
      - Teradata, Oracle Exadata, 
      - IBM Db2 Warehouse, 
      - SAP HANA, 
      - Vertica, 
      - Greenplum, 
      - Netezza, 
      - Cloudera Data Warehouse, 
      - Apache Hive, 
      - Apache Impala, 
      - Apache Drill
  - ETL (Extract, Transform, Load) or ELT (Extract, Load, Transform)
    - get data from one data store to another,
    - typically involves three main steps:
      - Extract: 
        - The process of retrieving data from various source systems,
      - Transform: 
        - The process of cleaning, 
          - enriching, and 
          - transforming the data into a format suitable for analysis and reporting,
        - common transformations include: 
          - union, 
          - join, 
          - filter, 
          - sort, 
          - aggregate, 
          - pivot, 
          - unpivot,  
          - regex, and
          - more complex transformations such as:
            - Data Cleaning
            - Data Enrichment
            - Data Aggregation
            - Data Filtering
            - Data Sorting
            - Data Joining
            - Data Splitting
            - Data Validation
            - Data Standardization
            - Data Normalization
            - Data Denormalization
            - Data Masking
            - Data Anonymization
            - Data Encryption
      - Load: The process of loading the transformed data into a target data store, such as a data warehouse or data lake.
    - ETL tools include:
      - Informatica PowerCenter
      - Syncsort DMX and DMX-h
        - h=hadoop
      - Microsoft SQL Server Integration Services (SSIS)
      - Apache NiFi
      - Open Source ETL Tools
        - Talend Open Studio
        - Pentaho Data Integration (PDI)
        - JasperETL
        - CloverETL
        - Kettle
        - Apache Camel
      - Python or Java pipelines using libraries such as:
        - Pandas
        - NumPy
        - PySpark
        - Apache Beam
        - Apache Airflow
      - IBM Infosphere DataStage
      - Oracle Data Integrator (ODI)
      - AWS Glue
      - Google Cloud Dataflow
      - Apache Airflow
      - Apache Spark
      - Apache Flink
      - Apache Beam
      - Apache Kafka Connect
      - Apache NiFi
      - Apache Sqoop
      - Apache Oozie
      - Apache Pig
      - Apache Hive
      - Apache Impala
      - Apache Drill
      - Apache HBase
      - Apache Cassandra
      - Apache MongoDB
      - Apache Redis
      - Apache Neo4j
      - Apache GraphX
      - Apache Presto
    - connect to source databses using:
      - JDBC (Java Database Connectivity)
      - ODBC (Open Database Connectivity)
      - REST API (Application Programming Interface)
      - File-based connectors (e.g., CSV, JSON, XML)
      - Cloud-based connectors (e.g., AWS S3, Google Cloud Storage, Azure Blob Storage)
      - Custom connectors developed using programming languages such as Java, Python, or Scala.
  - OLTP (Online Transaction Processing)
  - OLAP (Online Analytical Processing)
  - Data Science
  - Machine Learning
  - Deep Learning
  - Natural Language Processing (NLP)
  - Computer Vision
  - Big Data Analytics
  - Data Visualization
  - Data Governance
    - Process of managing the 
      - availability, 
      - usability, 
      - integrity, and 
      - security of the data used in an organization.
    - Add data governance checkpoints in SDLC especially at:
      - data transformation,
      - reporting
    - Examples of data governance practices include:
      - Corporate Glossary
        - Terminology management system that 
        - defines and standardizes the business terms used in an organization.
      - Data Catalog
      - Data Lineage
      - Data Auditing
      - Naming Conventions
        - Abbreviations
        - Acronyms
        - CamelCase
        - snake_case
        - kebab-case
      - Data Classification
      - Change Management policy for data
        - process for managing changes to data, 
          - including how changes are proposed, reviewed, approved, and implemented.
        - Documentation of changes made to data, 
          - including the reason for the change, 
          - the person responsible for the change, and 
          - the date of the change.
        - Approval process for changes to data, 
          - including who needs to approve the change and 
          - how the change will be implemented.
        - Communication plan for changes to data, 
          - including how the change will be communicated to stakeholders and 
          - how feedback will be collected.
      - Enterprise Data Dictionary
        - Superset of all data dictionaries in an organization, 
        - providing a comprehensive view of the organization's data assets.
        - Includes metadata about the data, such as its source, format, and usage.
        - Name
        - Description
        - Data Type
        - Owner
        - Steward
        - Source
        - Usage
        - Security Classification
      - Information Security
        - Identity and Access Management (IAM)
        - Data Encryption
        - Data Masking
        - Data Loss Prevention (DLP)
        - Compliance
          - PCI DSS
            - Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) 
            - set of security standards designed to ensure that all companies that 
              - accept, 
              - process, 
              - store or 
              - transmit credit card information maintain a secure environment.
          - HIPAA
          - GDPR
          - CCPA
          - SOX
          - FISMA
          - NIST
          - ISO 27001
          - SOC 2
          - FedRAMP
          - CSA STAR
          - Cloud Security Alliance (CSA)
          - Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX)
          - Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA)
          - National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
          - International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 27001
          - Service Organization Control (SOC) 2
          - Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP)
          - Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) STAR
        - Information Security Management System (ISMS)
          - systematic approach to managing sensitive company information so that it remains secure. 
          - includes people, processes and IT systems by applying a risk management process.
          - ISO 27001
        - InfoSec
      - Information Life Cycle Management
    - Roles in data governance include:
      - Chief Data Officer (CDO)
      - Data Governance Manager/Director
      - Data Steward
        - Stakeholder responsible for ensuring the quality and integrity of the data 
        - within a specific domain or area of the organization.
        - from business
      - SME (Subject Matter Expert)
        - Individual with specialized knowledge and expertise in a particular area or domain.
        - often consulted for their insights and guidance on specific topics or 
        - issues related to data governance.
      - Data Owner
      - Data Custodian
      - Data Analyst
      - Data Scientist
      - Data Engineer
      - Enterprise Information Architect
      - Data Governance Committee
      - Data Modeler
      - Data Quality Analyst
      - Data Privacy Officer
      - Data Compliance Officer
      - Data Security Officer
      - Data Governance Council
      - Data Governance Board
    - Data Stewardship
    - Data Ownership
    - Data Policies
    - Data Standards
    - Data Compliance
  - Data Security
  - Data Privacy
  - Data Quality
    - naming conventions,
    - data validation,
      - Data Type Validation
      - Range Validation
      - Format Validation
      - Uniqueness Validation
      - Referential Integrity Validation
      - Consistency Validation
      - Completeness Validation
      - Accuracy Validation
      - Timeliness Validation
    - Data Lineage
      - Process of tracking and documenting the flow of data from its origin to its destination, 
        - including all transformations, processes, and 
        - systems that the data passes through along the way.
      - Data Lineage provides visibility into the data's journey, 
        - allowing organizations to understand where the data came from,
        - how it has been transformed, and
        - where it is being used.
    - data cleansing,
    - data profiling,
      - profile data to understand its structure,
      - content, and
      - quality,
      - identify data quality issues and
      - make informed decisions about how to improve the data.
    - data enrichment,
    - data scoring,
      - score data based on predefined criteria to assess its quality, 
        - reliability, or relevance for specific use cases.
      - Data scoring can be used to prioritize data for analysis,
        - identify high-quality data for decision-making, and
        - improve the overall quality of the data used in an organization.
    - Data statistics
      - Descriptive Statistics
      - Inferential Statistics
      - Predictive Statistics
      - Prescriptive Statistics
      - Data Distribution
      - Data Central Tendency
      - Data Variability
      - Data Correlation
      - Data Regression Analysis
      - Data Hypothesis Testing
      - Data Sampling Techniques
      - Data Visualization Techniques
  - Data Integration
  - Data Management
  - Data Architecture
  - Data Engineering
  - Data Science Tools
  - Big Data Tools
  - Big Data Frameworks
  - Big Data Technologies
  - Big Data Platforms
  - Big Data Ecosystem
  - Big Data Use Cases
  - Big Data Challenges
  - Big Data Solutions
  - Big Data Trends
  - Big Data Future
  - Data Modelling Software
    - ER Studio
    - ERwin Data Modeler
    - PowerDesigner
    - Toad Data Modeler
    - Oracle SQL Developer Data Modeler
    - MySQL Workbench
    - Microsoft Visio
    - Lucidchart
    - Draw.io
    - Open Source Data Modelling Tools
      - ER One
      - Open ModelSphere
      - DBDesigner
      - SQL Power Architect
      - Vertabelo
      - ModelRight
      - ERBuilder
      - Dataedo
      - ERDPlus
      - QuickDBD
      - GenMyModel
      - ERD Lab
      - Dia
      - DBeaver
      - DbSchema
      - SchemaSpy
      - SchemaCrawler
      - SchemaSpy
      - SchemaCrawler
  - Data Modelling Tools
  - Data Modelling Techniques
  - Data Modelling Best Practices
  - Data Modelling Examples
  - Data Modelling Types
    - Conceptual Data Modelling
    - Logical Data Modelling
    - Physical Data Modelling
  - Data Modelling Notations
    - Entity-Relationship (ER) Notation
    - Unified Modeling Language (UML) Notation
    - Object-Role Modeling (ORM) Notation
    - IDEF1X Notation
    - Barker Notation
    - Crow's Foot Notation
    - Chen Notation
    - Bachman Notation
    - Martin Notation
    - Information Engineering (IE) Notation
    - Data Vault Notation
    - Anchor Modelling Notation
    - Dimensional Modelling Notation
    - Star Schema Notation
    - Snowflake Schema Notation
    - Data Vault 2.0 Notation
    - Graph Data Modelling Notation
    - NoSQL Data Modelling Notation
    - XML Data Modelling Notation
    - JSON Data Modelling Notation
    - RDF Data Modelling Notation
    - OWL Data Modelling Notation
    - ERwin Notation
    - PowerDesigner Notation
    - ER/Studio Notation
    - Toad Data Modeler Notation
    - Oracle SQL Developer Data Modeler Notation
    - MySQL Workbench Notation
    - Microsoft Visio Notation
    - Lucidchart Notation
    - Draw.io Notation
    - Gliffy Notation
    - Creately Notation
    - SmartDraw Notation
    - Visual Paradigm Notation
    - Sparx Systems Enterprise Architect Notation
    - IBM Rational Software Architect Notation
    - Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Notation
    - ER/Studio Data Architect Notation
    - ERwin Data Modeler Notation
    - PowerDesigner Data Architect Notation
    - Toad Data Modeler Notation
    - Oracle SQL Developer Data Modeler Notation
    - MySQL Workbench Data Modeler Notation
    - Microsoft Visio Data Modeler Notation
    - Lucidchart Data Modeler Notation
    - Draw.io Data Modeler Notation
    - Gliffy Data Modeler Notation
    - Creately Data Modeler Notation
    - SmartDraw Data Modeler Notation
    - Visual Paradigm Data Modeler Notation
    - Sparx Systems Enterprise Architect Data Modeler Notation
    - IBM Rational Software Architect Data Modeler Notation
    - Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Data Modeler Notation
  - Enterprise Data Architecture
  - Data Architecture Frameworks
    - The Open Group Architecture Framework (TOGAF)
      - Business Architecture
        - Model business requirements and processes to align with organizational goals and objectives.
      - Information Systems Architecture
        - Data lifecycle management, 
        - data governance, and 
        - data quality to ensure that data is accurate, consistent, and secure.
      - Application Architecture
        - Application logic and SDLC
      - Data Architecture
      - Technology Architecture
        - Infrastructure Modeling
        - Network Architecture
        - Security Architecture
        - Cloud Architecture
      - Architecture Development Method (ADM)
      - Architecture Content Framework
      - Architecture Repository
      - Architecture Capability Framework
    - Zachman Framework
    - Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework (FEAF)
    - Gartner Enterprise Architecture Framework
    - Department of Defense Architecture Framework (DoDAF)
    - Ministry of Defence Architecture Framework (MODAF)
  - Blockchain
    - distributed ledger technology that allows for secure and transparent transactions 
    - without the need for a central authority(broker or intermediary)
      - like banks or governments or Amazon Marketplace
    - used in various industries, including finance, supply chain management, healthcare, and more.
    - Key features of blockchain include:
      - Decentralization: Blockchain operates on a decentralized network of computers, 
        - eliminating the need for a central authority to manage transactions.
      - Transparency: All transactions on the blockchain are visible to all participants, 
        - ensuring transparency and accountability.
      - Security: Blockchain uses cryptographic techniques to secure transactions and 
        - prevent unauthorized access or tampering.
      - Immutability: Once a transaction is recorded on the blockchain, 
        - it cannot be altered or deleted, ensuring the integrity of the data.
      - Consensus Mechanism: Blockchain relies on consensus mechanisms, 
        - such as Proof of Work (PoW) or 
        - Proof of Stake (PoS), 
        - to validate and confirm transactions on the network.
    - Common use cases for blockchain include:
      - Cryptocurrencies: Bitcoin, Ethereum, and other cryptocurrencies 
        - are built on blockchain technology, 
        - allowing for secure and decentralized digital currency transactions.
      - Supply Chain Management: Blockchain can be used to track and verify the movement of goods 
        - through the supply chain, ensuring transparency and reducing fraud.
    - transaction can be:
      - peer-to-peer transactions,
      - smart contracts,
      - decentralized applications (DApps),
      - identity management,
      - voting systems,
      - healthcare records management,
      - real estate transactions,
      - intellectual property protection,
      - financial services,
      - and more.
  - Smart contracts
    - self-executing contracts with the terms of the agreement directly written into code. 
    - run on blockchain platforms, such as Ethereum, and 
    - automatically execute when predefined conditions are met.
    - Key features of smart contracts include:
      - Automation: Smart contracts automatically execute when predefined conditions are met, 
        - eliminating the need for intermediaries and reducing the risk of human error.
      - Transparency: The terms of the contract are visible to all parties involved, 
        - ensuring transparency and accountability.
      - Security: Smart contracts use cryptographic techniques to secure transactions and 
        - prevent unauthorized access or tampering.
      - Immutability: Once a smart contract is deployed on the blockchain, 
        - it cannot be altered or deleted, ensuring the integrity of the agreement.
    - Common use cases for smart contracts include:
      - Financial Services: Smart contracts can be used for various financial applications, 
        - such as decentralized finance (DeFi) platforms, 
        - insurance claims processing, and 
        - cross-border payments.
      - Supply Chain Management: Smart contracts can automate and verify transactions in the supply chain, 
        - ensuring transparency and reducing fraud.
      - Real Estate: Smart contracts can facilitate property transactions, 
        - automating processes such as title transfers and rental agreements.
      - Healthcare: Smart contracts can be used to manage healthcare records, 
        - automate insurance claims, and facilitate secure data sharing between healthcare providers.
      - Identity Management: Smart contracts can be used to manage digital identities, 
        - allowing individuals to control their personal information and securely share it with trusted parties.
      - Voting Systems: Smart contracts can be used to create secure and transparent voting systems, 
        - ensuring the integrity of the voting process and reducing the risk of fraud.
      - Intellectual Property Protection: Smart contracts can be used to manage intellectual property rights, 
        - automate royalty payments, and facilitate secure licensing agreements.
  - DApps (Decentralized Applications)
    - applications that run on a decentralized network, 
    - such as a blockchain, 
    - rather than on a centralized server. 
    - DApps are designed to be open-source, transparent, and resistant to censorship.
    - Key features of DApps include:
      - Decentralization: DApps operate on a decentralized network, 
        - eliminating the need for a central authority to manage the application.
      - Transparency: The code and data of DApps are visible to all participants, 
        - ensuring transparency and accountability.
      - Security: DApps use cryptographic techniques to secure transactions and 
        - prevent unauthorized access or tampering.
      - Immutability: Once a DApp is deployed on the blockchain, 
        - it cannot be altered or deleted, ensuring the integrity of the application.
    - Common use cases for DApps include:
      - Decentralized Finance (DeFi): DApps can be used for various financial applications, 
        - such as lending platforms, decentralized exchanges, and yield farming protocols.
      - Gaming: DApps can be used to create decentralized gaming platforms, 
        - allowing players to own and trade in-game assets securely.
      - Social Media: DApps can be used to create decentralized social media platforms, 
        - giving users control over their data and content.
      - Supply Chain Management: DApps can automate and verify transactions in the supply chain, 
        - ensuring transparency and reducing fraud.
      - Real Estate: DApps can facilitate property transactions, 
        - automating processes such as title transfers and rental agreements.
      - Healthcare: DApps can be used to manage healthcare records, 
        - automate insurance claims, and facilitate secure data sharing between healthcare providers.
      - Identity Management: DApps can be used to manage digital identities, 
        - allowing individuals to control their personal information and securely share it with trusted parties.
      - Voting Systems: DApps can be used to create secure and transparent voting systems, 
        - ensuring the integrity of the voting process and reducing the risk of fraud.
      - Intellectual Property Protection: DApps can be used to manage intellectual property rights, 
        - automate royalty payments, and facilitate secure licensing agreements.
  - Consensus algorithms
    - mechanisms used in blockchain networks to achieve agreement among distributed nodes on the state of the blockchain. 
    - Common consensus algorithms include:
      - Proof of Work (PoW)
      - Proof of Stake (PoS)
      - Delegated Proof of Stake (DPoS)
      - Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT)
      - Raft
      - Tendermint
      - Federated Byzantine Agreement (FBA)
      - Proof of Authority (PoA)
      - Proof of Elapsed Time (PoET)
      - Proof of Space (PoSpace)
      - Proof of Capacity (PoC)
      - Proof of Burn (PoB)
      - Proof of Activity (PoA)
      - Proof of Importance (PoI)
      - Proof of History (PoH)
      - Proof of Weight (PoWeight)
      - Proof of Space-Time (PoST)
  - Types of Data
    - Structured Data
    - Unstructured Data
    - Semi-Structured Data
    - Time-Series Data
    - Geospatial Data
    - Graph Data
    - Text Data
    - Image Data
    - Video Data
    - Audio Data
    - Sensor Data
    - Log Data
    - Social Media Data
    - Machine Data
    - Internet of Things (IoT) Data
    - Big Data
  - Types of Data in Data Modelling
    - Entity
    - Attribute
    - Relationship
    - Primary Key
    - Foreign Key
    - Composite Key
    - Surrogate Key
    - Candidate Key
    - Alternate Key
    - Unique Key
    - Index
    - View
    - Stored Procedure
    - Function
    - Trigger
    - Schema
    - Table
    - Column
    - Row
    - Data Type
    - Null Value
    - Default Value
    - Constraint
    - Check Constraint
    - Unique Constraint
    - Primary Key Constraint
    - Foreign Key Constraint
    - Not Null Constraint
    - Default Constraint
    - Index Constraint
    - View Constraint
    - Stored Procedure Constraint
    - Function Constraint
    - Trigger Constraint
    - Schema Constraint
  - Types of Data in Data Architecture
    - Master Data
      - core data essential to the operations of a business. 
      - information about customers, 
      - products, 
      - suppliers, and 
      - other key entities that are critical to the functioning of the organization. 
      - used across multiple systems and applications.
      - doesnot change frequently and is typically maintained in a centralized repository, 
      - such as a master data management (MDM) system.
      - examples include eye color,
        - blood type,
        - serial number of a product,
        - building street address,
      - e.g. CRM, ERP, MDM
    - Reference Data
    - Transactional Data
      - generated from day-to-day operations of business and 
      - captures specific events or transactions. 
      - Examples include 
        - sales transactions, 
        - customer interactions, and 
        - financial transactions. 
      - time-stamped and 
      - used for operational reporting and analysis.
    - lookup data
      - used to populate dropdowns,
      - validate input, and
      - provide reference information for other data elements.
    - Analytical Data
    - Metadata
      - data that provides information about other data. 
      - describes the characteristics, structure, and context of data, 
      - making it easier to understand, manage, and use the data effectively. 
      - Examples of metadata include:
        - Data Type: Describes the type of data 
          - (e.g., string, integer, date).
        - Data Source: Indicates where the data originated from 
          - (e.g., database, file, API).
        - Data Owner: 
          - Identifies the person or team responsible for the data.
        - Data Steward: 
          - Identifies the person or team responsible for managing the data.
        - Data Quality: 
          - Provides information about the quality of the data 
          - (e.g., accuracy, completeness, consistency).
        - Data Usage: 
          - Describes how the data is used within the organization 
          - (e.g., reporting, analytics, operational processes).
        - Data Security: 
          - Indicates the security classification of the data 
          - (e.g., confidential, public, internal).
        - Data Retention: 
          - Specifies how long the data should be retained and 
          - when it should be archived or deleted.
    - Big Data
    - Real-Time Data
    - Historical Data
    - Unstructured Data
    - Semi-Structured Data
    - Structured Data
    - Time-Series Data
    - Geospatial Data
    - Graph Data
    - Text Data
    - Image Data
    - Video Data
    - Audio Data
    - Sensor Data
    - Log Data
    - Social Media Data
    - Machine Data
    - Internet of Things (IoT) Data
  - SQl
    - DDL (Data Definition Language)
    - DML (Data Manipulation Language)
    - DCL (Data Control Language)
    - TCL (Transaction Control Language)
    - e.g. 
      - CREATE TABLE
      - INSERT INTO
      - SELECT
      - UPDATE
      - DELETE
      - GRANT
      - REVOKE
      - COMMIT
      - ROLLBACK
      - SAVEPOINT
    - e.g. SQL Queries
      - SELECT * FROM Customers;
      - SELECT Name, Age FROM Employees WHERE Department = 'Sales';
      - INSERT INTO Orders (CustomerID, OrderDate, TotalAmount) VALUES (1, '2023-01-01', 100.00);
      - UPDATE Products SET Price = 19.99 WHERE ProductID = 1;
      - DELETE FROM Customers WHERE CustomerID = 1;
      - CREATE TABLE Employees (EmployeeID INT PRIMARY KEY, Name VARCHAR(50), Age INT, Department VARCHAR(50));
      - ALTER TABLE Customers ADD COLUMN Email VARCHAR(100);
      - DROP TABLE Orders;
      - GRANT SELECT ON Employees TO User1;
      - REVOKE SELECT ON Employees FROM User1;
      - COMMIT;
      - ROLLBACK;
      - SAVEPOINT Savepoint1;
  - NoSQL
    - Document Stores
    - Key-Value Stores
    - Column-Family Stores
    - Graph Databases
    - Time-Series Databases
    - Object-Oriented Databases
    - Multi-Model Databases
    - In-Memory Databases
    - Distributed Databases
    - Cloud-Based Databases
    - NewSQL Databases
  - Data Warehousing
    - process of collecting, storing, and managing large volumes of data from various sources to support business intelligence and analytics activities. 
    - Data warehousing involves the extraction, transformation, and loading (ETL) of data from operational systems into a central repository, 
    - where it can be organized, optimized, and made available for analysis and reporting.
    - Key components of a data warehouse include:
      - Data Sources: Operational systems, external data sources, and other databases that provide the raw data for the data warehouse.
      - ETL Process: The process of extracting data from source systems, transforming it into a consistent format, and loading it into the data warehouse.
      - Data Storage: The central repository where the data is stored, typically organized in a star schema or snowflake schema for efficient querying and analysis.
      - Metadata: Information about the data, such as its source, structure, and usage, which helps users understand and navigate the data warehouse.
      - Data Access Tools: Tools and interfaces that allow users to query, analyze, and visualize the data in the data warehouse, such as SQL clients, business intelligence tools, and data visualization platforms.
    - Common use cases for data warehousing include:
      - Business Intelligence: Data warehouses provide a centralized repository of data that can be used for reporting, analysis, and decision-making activities.
      - Data Analytics: Data warehouses enable organizations to perform complex analytics and gain insights from their data, such as customer behavior analysis, sales forecasting, and market research.
      - Data Integration: Data warehouses can integrate data from multiple sources, providing a unified view of the organization's data assets and enabling cross-functional analysis.
      - Data Governance: 
        - Data warehouses can support data governance initiatives by providing a centralized repository 
        - for data management, quality control, and compliance activities.
      - Data Archiving: 
        - Data warehouses can serve as a long-term storage solution for historical data, 
        - allowing organizations to retain and access data for regulatory compliance, auditing, 
        - and historical analysis purposes.
  - Data Model Terminology: Logical Model vs Physical Model
    - Entity: Table
    - Attribute: Column
    - Row: Record
    - Relationship:
      - Primary Key
      - Foreign Key
    - Composite Key
    - Surrogate Key
    - Candidate Key
    - Alternate Key
    - Unique Key
    - Index
    - View
    - Stored Procedure
    - Function
    - Trigger
    - Schema
  - Database Administration
    - DBA: Database Administrator
    - responsibilities of DBA include:
      - Database Installation and Configuration
      - Database Security Management
      - Database Backup and Recovery
      - Database Performance Tuning
      - Database Monitoring and Maintenance
      - Database User Management
      - Database Capacity Planning
      - Database Upgrades and Patching
      - Database Troubleshooting and Issue Resolution
      - Database Documentation and Reporting
      - Database Compliance and Auditing
        - log database activities,
          - login attempts,
            - failed login attempts,
          - data changes, and
          - access to sensitive data,
        - monitor database access and usage, and
        - ensure compliance with regulatory requirements and organizational policies.
        - employ principles of least privilege and 
          - role-based access control (RBAC) to restrict access to sensitive data and database resources, 
          - ensuring that users only have the necessary permissions to perform their job functions.
      - Database Disaster Recovery Planning
      - Database High Availability and Replication
      - Database Automation and Scripting
      - Database Change Management
      - Database Vendor Management
      - Database Training and Support
      - Database Architecture and Design
      - Database Development and Testing
      - Database Data Modeling and Schema Design
        - reducing joins,
        - combining tables,
        - denormalization,
      - Database Query Optimization
      - Database Indexing and Partitioning
    - Ways to write SQL code:
      - SQL Clients
      - Integrated Development Environments (IDEs)
      - Command-Line Interfaces (CLIs)
      - Database Management Tools
      - Data Visualization Tools
      - Business Intelligence Tools
      - Cloud-Based Database Services
    - DAO: Data Access Object
      - design pattern that provides an abstract interface to a database or other persistence mechanism. 
      - encapsulates the logic for accessing and manipulating data, 
      - allowing for separation of concerns and improved maintainability of the application code.
      - typically includes methods for performing CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) operations on the underlying data store, 
      - as well as methods for managing database connections and transactions.
      - Benefits of using a DAO include:
        - Abstraction: DAOs provide a layer of abstraction between the application code and the underlying data store, allowing for flexibility and ease of maintenance.
        - Reusability: DAOs can be reused across different parts of the application, reducing code duplication and improving consistency.
        - Testability: DAOs can be easily tested in isolation, allowing for better unit testing and improved code quality.
      - SQL can be stored in form of:
        - Embedded SQL in application code
          - dedicated class as DAO (Data Access Object) or Repository
          - needs to be compiled and deployed with the application code
          - e.g. CustomerDAO.java, OrderDAO.java, ProductDAO.java, etc.
          - needs downtime for changes and updates
          - Prone to SQL injection attacks
          - Dynamic SQL
          - Network latency, as the SQL code is executed on the application server and requires communication with the database server, which can lead to slower performance compared to stored procedures.
        - Stored Procedures
          - Dedicated by function or business logic
          - Executable on the database server(RDBMS)
          - e.g. CustomerDAO, OrderDAO, ProductDAO, etc.
          - can be called from application code or other stored procedures
          - no need to compile and deploy with the application code, 
          - as they are stored and executed on the database server
          - no downtime
          - Less prone to SQL injection attacks, 
            - as the SQL code is stored and executed on the database server, 
            - rather than being embedded in the application code.
          - Not dynamic, as they are precompiled and stored on the database server, 
            - which can limit their flexibility and adaptability to changing business requirements.
          - preferred method: access database objects through stored procedures, 
            - as it provides better security, maintainability, and performance compared to embedding SQL in application code. 
            - By using stored procedures, you can centralize your database logic, 
              - making it easier to manage and update as needed, 
              - without requiring changes to the application code.
          - offers layer of abstraction between the application code and the database, 
            - allowing for better separation of concerns and improved maintainability of the application code. 
            - By encapsulating the database logic within stored procedures, you can reduce the risk of SQL injection attacks and improve the overall security of your application. 
            - Additionally, stored procedures can be optimized for performance, 
              - as they are precompiled and stored on the database server, 
              - which can lead to faster execution times compared to embedding SQL in application code.
          - processed on the database server, 
            - which can reduce network latency and improve performance compared to embedding SQL in application code, 
            - as the SQL code is executed directly on the database server, 
            - rather than requiring communication between the application server and the database server. 
            - This can lead to faster execution times and improved overall performance of your application.
